### MAVA 337 Introduction to Programming for Design  (2016 Spring)

# Lab 1: Java and BlueJ Essentials

This lab relates to the first lecture, where the essential "components" of Java were covered. After this lab, you should be comfortable with the terms below:

- **class**
- **object**
- **instance**
- **variable**
- **data type**
- **method**
- **expression**
- **assignment**
- **documentation**
- **comment**
- **debugging**

## Scenario: Campus Parking Records

You have been contracted by the campus security to develop a piece of software for them.

Since parking space on the campus is limited, the university limits the number of cars coming in by charging a fee from students who wish to use the parking facilities. Campus security needs to keep track of the cars that belong to people who have paid their fees. Until now, they have been using pen and paper to do this. You will help them catch up with the times.

## 1) Setting Up BlueJ

We are hoping that you already have BlueJ up and running on your computer. If not, please go to [bluej.org](http://www.bluej.org) now to download the latest version of the BlueJ for your operating system, and install it on your computer.

## 2) Creating a Java Project in BlueJ

- Use BlueJ’s *Project* menu to create a *New Project* called "Campus Parking Records".

> It might be wise to make a “MAVA 337” folder to keep all of your projects for this course. The path that I would use could look like the following: “…/MAVA 337 Intro to Programming for Design/Java/Lab 1 – Essentials/Campus Parking Records/”

> Once the project is created, visit the folder where you put the project and have a look at the contents. Notice that there are two files: "package.bluej" and "README.TXT". "package.bluej" is your main project file that describes your project to BlueJ. "README.TXT" describes your project to the general public, which includes people who may or may not have BlueJ.

## 3)	Classes

In Java, most of your code will reside inside in **classes**. Classes are essentially blueprints/models for **objects**, which are how your data is represented in the computer. In our project, for now, we need to represent data about one kind of thing only: cars.

- Create a *New Class* named `Car`.
- Double-click the `Car` class in the BlueJ window to see the code.

> Notice that the name of  our class is “Car”. Two things are interesting about this name: First, it is singular – “Car”, not “Cars”; because this class describes how you will represent information about a single car, not a collection of cars. Second, it starts with a capital “C”, because that is a “convention” among Java programmers and it makes easier for other people to read and understand your code.

> In the window that pops up when you click the *New Class* button, you will see options where you can change the class type. For now, select “Class” (which is already pre-selected, so you don’t have to do anything about it).

- Now visit your project folder. Notice that there is a new file there called “Car.java”. This file was generated by BlueJ when you created the class.
- Open the "Car.java" file using a text editor. Compare its contents to the contents of the BlueJ window for the `Car` class. Be amazed. Close the text editor.

## 4) Documentation and Class Declaration

### Documentation

The code for the `Car` class begins with the following:

    /**
     * Write a description of class Car here.
     *
     * @author (your name)
     * @version (a version number or a date)
     */

The `/*` and `*/` here denote the beginning and the end of **comments**. Comments are used to provide **documentation** about your code to other programmers who may have to read and understand what you have done. Comments are ignored by the computer when you **compile** and run the code.

- Replace the phrase `Write a description of class Car here.` with the appropriate information (e.g. `Describes a car.`).
- Replace `(your name)` with your name/handle/username/nickname.
- Replace `(a version number or a date)` with `2016-02-15`.

> Notice that each line of the comments in the beginning of your code begins with a `*`. Do not erase these symbols. Although they are redundant for human readers, these symbols can be used later by software that automatically generate seperate documentation text for your Java code, so that people don't need to dive inside your code to see the documentation and understand what it does.

> Notice the selection box on the upper right hand corner of the window. You can use it to switch to the *Documentation* view from the *Source Code* view, and see the aforementioned software-generated documentation.

Right below the comments, notice the **class declaration**:

    public class Car

This marks the beginning of the code for your class begins. All of the code that belongs to your class will reside between the `{` and `}` marks that follow the class declaration.

Notice the `public` keyword. This means that other parts of your program will be able to use the functionality of this class. During this course, all of your class declarations will begin with the `public` keyword.

### 4) Variables and Data Types

Notice the lines:

    // instance variables - replace the example below with your own
    private int x;

This is where you **declare** the **variables** for your class, which store information about a car.

We need to store 4 specific pieces of information about each car: the name and ID of the student who drives it, its licence plate, and whether or not its parking fee has been paid in full.

> The first line, beginning with `//`, is a comment. There are no symbols (like `*/`) that mark its end, because `//` designates the whole line as a comment. The comment terminates when you move to the next line.

- Delete the phrase ` - replace the example below with your own`.

Notice the `private` keyword. This means that other classes in your program will not be able to directly read or change the variables that belong to **instances** of this **class**. During this lab, all of your **variable** declarations will begin with the `private` keyword.

- Think about what **data types** you will use for these 4 **variables**. To make your life easier, we'll give you 3 choices: `ìnt`, `String`, and `boolean`. Pick from among these.
- **Declare** a **variable** called `ownerName`, which holds information about the name of the student who drives the car.
- **Declare** a **variable** called `ownerID` to hold the ID number for the student who drives the car.
- **Declare** a **variable** called `licencePlate` to hold the car's licence plate information.
- **Declare** a **variable** called `isFeePaid` to hold information about whether or not the car's parking fee has been paid.

> Notice that, while class names begin with capital letters, variables begin with lower case letters. Again, this is a convention among programmers. Also notice that for both classes and variables, if the name consists of more than one word, no spaces are put between words, and the first letter of each word after the first is always capitalized (this is called "camel case").

- *Compile* your class. Make sure you have no syntax errors.

## 5) Objects and Instances

- Come back to the main BlueJ window that shows your classes.
- Right-click the `Car` class and **instantiate** a new `Car` **object** named `car`. (Notice the lowercase first letter.)
- Double-click the new `Car` object.
- Observe that all of its variables are `null`, `0`, or `false`. Try to change these values. Taste failure. *Close* the window.

You have declared the variables that will store information, but you can't assign **values** to them. To change the values of your variables, you will need **methods**.

## 6) Methods

**Variables** store data. **Methods** do things with the data. You will now write **mutator methods** (a.k.a. **setter methods**) that allow you to change the values of the variables in your `Car` class.

Inside the code for your `Car` class, find the following section:

    /**
     * An example of a method - replace this comment with your own
     *
     * @param  y   a sample parameter for a method
     * @return     the sum of x and y
     */
    public void sampleMethod(int y)
    {
        // put your code here
        //return x + y;
    }

Notice that this portion looks an awful lot like the class declaration and the comments that precede it.

- Change the name of the sample method here from `sampleMethod` to `setOwnerName`.
- Edit `setOwnerName()` to write a method that takes a `String` called `newName` as a **parameter** and **assigns** the value of `newName to the value of the `ownerName` variable.
- Remember to set the **return type** of the method to `void`, since this method does not **return** anything.
- Edit the documentation for this method to describe what it does, what parameters it requires, and what it returns.
- *Compile* your class.

Now let's see if you have succeeded in writing the **setter** for the `ownerName` variable. (This is a basic form of what people call **testing**.)

- Come back to the main BlueJ window. **Instantiate** a new `Car` object.
- *Inspect* the object to see that its `ownerName` is `null`.
- Right-click the `Car` **instance** and **call** the `setOwnerName`method. Change the name of the car's owner to `"Ali"`. Notice the quotation marks.
- *Inspect* the `Car` **instance** again to see that its `ownerName` has indeed been changed to "Ali".

> `"Ali"` denotes a string that contains the **characters** `A`, `l`, and `i`. If you omit the quotation marks when supplying this string as a parameter to your method, the computer will not understand that you mean a string, and it will look for a variable named `Ali`.

- Write the **setter methods** for the remaining three variables.
- Remember to write the **documentation**.
- See that your **setters** are working by **instantiating** a new `Car`and **calling** these methods.

## 7) Constructor

Right now we can **set** the **values** of the **variables** on our `Car`s after we create them. However, all of our variables are **initialised** with values that do not really make sense. To set these values as we are **instantiating** `Car` objects, we need a **constructor**. A constructor is basically a **method** that is **called** automatically when you instantiate an object.

Inside the code for your `Car` **class**, find the following section:

    /**
     * Constructor for objects of class Car
     */
    public Car()
    {
        // initialise instance variables
        //x = 0;
    }

Notice that the constructor does not have a **return type**, because it is obvious that it returns a `Car` object.

- Edit the **constructor** to **require** 4 **parameters**: `initOwnerName`, `initOwnerId`, `initLicencePlate`, and `initIsFeePaid`. Remember to specify what the data types for these variables should be.
- Replace the comments inside of the constructor with code that **assigns** the values of the 4 parameters taken by the constructor to the 4 variables we in our `Car` class.
- *Compile* your class. Make sure there are no syntax errors.

Now let's test the constructor:

- Come back to the main BlueJ window. **Instantiate** a new `Car` object.
- Observe that you now need to type in the values for its four variables as your are instantiating an object.
- Right-click the object you just instantiate, and observe that you can still call your **setters** to change the values of its variables.

Congratulations. You now have a piece of software that can help you keep track of the cars that are allowed to park inside the university campus.

## 8) Debugging and Calculated Fields

You have delivered the software you wrote to campus security. A few days later, they call you back, saying there is one more feature that they need to have in the software. They have tried to add this feature themselves, but they made some mistakes. Their code isn't working, and they need you to fix it.

The new feature they require is this: The maximum total weight of the car, including its passengers and cargo, needs to be known. Cars have information about their weight on their registration documents. The maximum weight must be estimated from this information by adding 600 kgs to the weight on the registration.

- Go to the *WeightedCar.java* file in this repository. Create a new class inside your BlueJ project called `WeightedCar`. Copy & paste the code in the *WeightedCar.java* file into your new class.
- Try to compile the `WeightedCar` class. Notice that there are a number of mistakes in the code that cause the compiler to fail.
- Find the mistakes in the code and fix them to achieve the functionality that campus security requires.
- Remember to fix the documentation for the `calculateTotalWeight()` method.

## (Bonus Material)

### Coding Style and Conventions

- ["Programming Style" on Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Programming_style)
- [Oracle's Official Code Conventions for the Java Programming Language](http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/codeconvtoc-136057.html)
- [Google Java Style](https://google.github.io/styleguide/javaguide.html)

Notice that a companies, projects, or communities may adopt conventions and stylistic decisions that are a bit different from the "official" way of doing things.

### Access Control (*public*, *private* and *protected* Keywords)

- ["Variable Scope" on Java Made Easy](http://www.java-made-easy.com/variable-scope.html)
- ["Difference between public, default, protected, and private?" on Stack Overflow](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/215497/difference-between-public-default-protected-and-private)
- ["Controlling Access to Members of a Class" in the Official Java Documentation](http://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/javaOO/accesscontrol.html)

### What does it mean to "compile" code?

- ["Compiled vs. Interpreted Languages" on Stack Overflow](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/3265357/compiled-vs-interpreted-languages)